As the war with Iran grinds on, the
conversation in Washington is slowly
shifting. Airstrikes have disrupted
parts of Iran's missile and drone
programs, but they haven't forced it to
change course. [music]
That raises a familiar question in
American wars. If air power is not
enough, what comes next?
Some officials have begun discussing the
possibility of ground operations.
[music] Trump has repeatedly said he
does not want to take options off the
table. Meanwhile, [music] the military
posture is already shifting. Two Marine
Expeditionary Units have been dispatched
to the Persian Gulf, giving the White
House additional military options should
the conflict continue to escalate. And
yes, there's still room for this to
spiral.
But talking about ground operations and
actually carrying them out are two very
different things. America has several
ways it could introduce [music]
troops into Iran, from small special
forces operations to limited territorial
seizures, [music] or in the most extreme
scenario, a full invasion. Yet each step
[music] in that direction introduces new
military and political complications.
In practice, the deeper the United
States [music] tries to push into Iran,
the more difficult it would be to
sustain the war. Because while America
needs victory, Iran only needs tomorrow.
We often think of connectivity as
something constant. But the moment you
cross a border, you're suddenly dealing
with roaming fees, unreliable Wi-Fi, or
the hassle of finding a local SIM card
in an unfamiliar place.
That's where today's sponsor comes in.
Sayalee gives you mobile data in over
200 destinations without having to swap
SIM cards or search for a provider when
you arrive. They do this with an eSIM, a
digital version of a SIM card that's
already built into most modern phones.
It works the same way as a regular SIM,
but you don't need to put anything into
your phone. Just download the Sayalee
app on your phone, pick a plan for the
country you're going to, and turn it on
right before your flight. When you land,
you'll already be connected. It's easy
to set up with affordable plans that
help you avoid roaming fees. And if
anything goes wrong, Sayalee has [music]
24/7 support. They'll even give you a
refund if your mobile phone doesn't
support eSIM services for some reason.
It's a simple solution to a problem most
people only notice when it's already too
late. Go to sayalee.com/caspianreport,
download the app, and use Caspian Report
coupon code to get 15% off any of your
chosen plans, or simply scan the QR code
on screen to claim the discount
instantly. [music]
If American forces were to enter Iran,
the most [music] practical starting
point would be special operations
missions. The reason is partly
political.
Special operations tend to give the
White House far more flexibility than
conventional wars.
>> [music]
>> Congress rarely tries to restrict these
missions, and their secrecy often
shields the political [music] brass from
immediate public backlash.
For instance, during his first term in
2019, Trump approved a covert mission
inside North Korea aimed at planting a
listening device to intercept
communications during the nuclear
negotiations. The operation fell apart
after the team encountered a fishing
boat and opened fire, killing several
civilians and forcing the mission to
abort. And yet, the incident remained
secret for years and produced little
political fallout once it surfaced.
[music] Episodes like that help explain
why special operations remain attractive
to policy makers, both politically and
militarily. Elite units such as Navy
SEALs, Delta Force, or the Green Berets
are designed for precisely this type of
work. They can deploy quickly, operate
in small numbers, and avoid the massive
logistical footprint [music]
needed for conventional armies. These
teams could launch from aircraft
carriers or enter the country through
Iran's long coastline and mountainous
borders.
Once inside Iran, there is no shortage
of possible targets. Perhaps [music] the
most pressing objective is securing the
stockpile of highly enriched uranium.
Iran is believed to possess around 400
kg of uranium enriched [music] to
roughly 60%. No one knows the precise
location. It could be near the city of
Isfahan, where much of the nuclear
research takes place, [music] or even
deep underground in Pickaxe Mountain.
A raid to seize or neutralize that
material could set back Iran's nuclear
program. But there is a problem. The
operation would take time, and time
[music] is exactly what special forces
usually try to avoid. Extracting or
diluting the material would require
troops to remain on site long enough for
Iranian forces to respond. So, it would
be a high-risk, [music] high-reward
operation.
Other missions would be faster, but also
less decisive. Special forces could
strike research facilities tied [music]
to Iran's nuclear program, or sabotage
factories connected to missile and drone
production. These raids might slow
Iran's [music] military programs, but
they wouldn't eliminate them. Iran's
industrial networks are widely
dispersed, and destroying one facility
rarely shuts down the entire system.
Assassinations of senior military
commanders are another possibility, but
Iran has a decentralized defense
doctrine in which the IRGC is divided
into 31 units, each commanded by a
brigadier general.
The units operate autonomously without
approval from the central command in
Tehran.
>> [music]
>> So, removing individual leaders would
cause disruption, but it wouldn't stop
the country from launching missiles or
drones.
There is also the possibility of working
with opposition groups inside Iran.
Special forces might attempt to organize
Kurdish militias or support underground
networks in major [music] cities.
However, building an insurgency is not
something that happens overnight. It
takes years of preparation and depends
on local political conditions that
outsiders cannot easily control.
>> [music]
>> Even if any of these operations
succeeded tactically, they would carry
political risk at home. [music] The
capture or death of American special
operations troops would quickly become a
national story. Washington still
remembers the failed 1980 hostage rescue
mission in Iran, Operation Desert Claw,
which collapsed in the desert and
[music] helped doom Jimmy Carter's
presidency. Any administration
considering covert operations inside
Iran knows how quickly a failed raid can
turn into a political crisis.
If Washington wants to escalate the war
without committing to a full-scale
invasion, the next step would likely
involve limited territorial operations.
Instead of trying to push deep into
Iran, the United [music] States could
attempt to seize specific targets along
the country's coastline or on nearby
islands. Operations like these would
[music] likely fall to the US Marines.
Their Expeditionary Units specialize in
launching swift assaults along
from amphibious assault ships using
helicopters, landing craft, and [music]
tilt-rotor aircraft to move troops
quickly onto contested territory.
That capability is one reason the
Pentagon has ordered two Marine
Expeditionary Units, numbering roughly
4,400 Marines, to move toward the
Persian Gulf to reinforce its military
presence. However, this deployment does
not necessarily mean an invasion is
imminent. What it does provide is the
ability to launch limited operations
against Iran's coastal infrastructure if
the conflict continues to widen.
The most obvious targets would lie near
the Strait of Hormuz. Iran's economy
depends heavily on oil exports, and
several islands and ports play an
essential role in that system. In
theory, the US could try to capture
them.
Islands such as Kharg, Kish, and Qeshm
sit near crucial shipping routes. Taking
control of these locations could give
American forces greater leverage over
the traffic in the Persian Gulf and the
Strait of Hormuz. Marine Expeditionary
Units operating with US carrier strike
groups or airborne units could be used
for such missions. On the flip side,
>> [music]
>> Iran maintains a dispersed network of
radar installations, missile batteries,
and naval facilities along the nearby
coastline, which allows it to monitor
and target shipping traffic through the
narrow waterway. US airstrikes may
damage some of these sites, but the
network itself is designed to survive
bombardment through redundancy and
mobility.
Seizing or disabling key positions,
particularly the islands of Abu Musa,
Greater Tunb, and Lesser Tunb, and the
coastal bases near Bandar Abbas could
temporarily weaken Tehran's ability to
interfere with one of the world's most
important energy corridors. That is
exactly the type of mission Marine
Expeditionary Units are built to carry
out.
Another potential objective would be
Iran's oil export infrastructure. Kharg
Island, which handles the overwhelming
majority of the country's crude
shipments, has already been struck by
American air power. US forces recently
destroyed dozens of military
installations on the island, targeting
missile storage sites and naval mine
facilities. But, the energy
infrastructure itself was deliberately
left intact. That restraint leaves
Washington with a powerful escalation
option. If the war continues to widen,
Trump could still choose to
Iran's export hub either through further
air strikes or by temporarily seizing
the island.
Beyond that, even more ambitious options
have recently come into view. American
forces could attempt to seize a major
port such as Bandar Abbas or Chabahar,
both of which are vital to Iran's
maritime trade. Even the threat of a
landing near large coastal cities could
force Tehran to divert military forces
away from other parts of the conflict.
But, amphibious assaults are among the
most difficult operations in warfare.
[music] The United States has conducted
landings in places like Panama in 1989,
Beirut in 1958, and Haiti in 1994,
but these were unopposed landings,
meaning they were conducted without
hostile fire. The last time America
attempted a truly contested landing
against a defended coastline was during
the Korean War in 1950.
Doing so today would expose landing
forces to drones, anti-ship missiles,
coastal defenses, and artillery. Even if
the initial assault succeeded, American
troops could quickly find themselves
fighting in dense urban areas where many
of their technological advantages begin
to fade.
Moreover, the geography and distance of
such an operation favor Tehran. Iranian
forces would be operating close to their
own bases, supply lines, and missile
systems, while American troops would
depend on ships and regional bases that
could themselves become targets.
For that reason, focusing on Iran's
isolated islands is a far more
manageable objective than the large
coastal cities. Yet, perhaps the hardest
question of all is what happens after.
Capturing territory is one thing,
holding it and eventually getting out is
something else entirely.
The final option, and the most dramatic
one, would be a full-scale invasion. One
aimed either at dismantling Iran's
conventional military forces or bringing
down the Islamic Republic altogether.
But, an operation of this scale would
come at an enormous cost.
For comparison, the invasion of Iraq in
2003 required more than 6 months to
assemble around 200,000 soldiers in the
region. Iran, however, is larger in size
and population and is more mountainous,
>> [music]
>> so the required number of troops and
resources would be many times that of
the Iraqi experience.
The United States would also need
regional support. Neighboring countries
would have to host American troops
[music] and allow supply lines to run
through their territory. Yet, few
governments appear to have an appetite
for total war.
Then, there is the political challenge
at home. A war of this scale would
require massive funding and long-term
commitment. Under US law, Congress would
almost certainly need to approve such an
operation.
Without broad public support, sustaining
[music] a prolonged ground war would be
extremely difficult.
Fortunately, we're not there [music]
yet. A full-scale invasion is unlikely.
Only a major economic or military blow
from Iran
>> [music]
>> would be enough to push public opinion
toward a ground war. Assuming that
obstacles such as funding, mobilization,
popular support, and regional logistics
were overcome, Washington could then
begin assembling the forces required for
a full-scale invasion.
This would likely involve a buildup of
hundreds of thousands of troops, with
the initial phase focusing on amphibious
landings along Iran's southern coast,
and a push toward major cities and the
oil-rich province of Khuzestan.
American forces could then attempt to
weaken the Iranian military while
supporting local opposition groups,
similar to the strategy used in
Afghanistan in 2001. Or, they might
attempt a direct advance toward [music]
Tehran, as they did with Baghdad 2 years
later.
Either way, a full-scale invasion of
Iran would be nothing short of a
strategic disaster. There would be no
quick victory. It would likely unfold
over months or years, especially if the
United States relied on proxy forces
rather than committing to a direct
advance into the Iranian interior.
[music] And even then, victory on the
battlefield would only mark the
beginning of a far longer phase. Iran's
population is large, its terrain [music]
is difficult, and stabilizing the
country could tie down American forces
for years, if not decades. All it would
do is drain American resources away from
Europe and Asia. And when a superpower
is busy in one theater, its rivals
rehearse in another.
I've [snorts] been your host, Shirvan,
from Caspian Report. [music] If you
enjoy these videos, consider supporting
the channel on Patreon, and click the
bell icon so the next one doesn't slip
past you. Thank you for your time, and
salaam.